From The New York Times, I'm Rachel
Abrams and [music] this is The Daily.
>> [music]
>> Ladies and gentlemen, the president of
the United [music] States.
>> [applause]
>> Last week, President Trump unveiled
Trump Rx. [music] Dozens of the most
commonly used prescription drugs will be
available at dramatic discounts for all
consumers throughout
a new [music] website is called
trumprx.gov.
The administration's answer to the high
cost [music] of prescription drugs. This
launch represents the largest reduction
in prescription drug prices in history
by
many, many times and it's not even
close. You're going to see numbers that
you're not going to believe.
The president hailed the website as a
quote transformative [music] healthcare
initiative. Congratulations to you on
all that money you're saving, okay?
[music]
Thank you. Thank you very much,
everybody. Appreciate it. Today,
>> [music]
>> my colleague Margo Sanger-Katz explains
how the site works and whether [music]
it will actually save Americans money.
>> [music]
>> It's Wednesday, [music] February 11th.
Margo, welcome back to the show.
It's nice to be back. I feel like I have
been hearing about this Trump Rx thing
for probably months now without having a
good sense of what this thing actually
was. Like I didn't know if it was an
online pharmacy, a Trump-branded online
pharmacy perhaps. And last week, the
website was actually unveiled. So,
Margo, start off by telling us what is
Trump Rx?
So, I think in some ways it's easier to
say what it's not. It's not a place that
you can buy prescription drugs. This is
not a pharmacy. It is not a store that's
run by the federal government. Instead,
it's a place that you can go if you're
looking to buy certain prescription
drugs. It will help you figure out how
to get them at a discounted price. So,
this is the federal government's effort
to help you find drugs at a good price,
but not to sell you drugs directly.
Which is so interesting because I'm
pretty sure that pretty much every
presidential candidate in my lifetime
has talked at some point and in some
form about bringing down drug prices.
And this website, TrumpRx, seems like an
unusual step toward addressing a very
intractable problem. So, how did the
president arrive as this as the solution
right now?
So, I think there's two things going on.
One is that Trump is obviously under a
lot of pressure right now to do
something about affordability, and
particularly about the affordability of
healthcare. Democrats have just been
hammering the Trump administration on
this, and a lot of Americans are
concerned about high and rising costs
for healthcare. Mhm. The other thing is
that drug prices have sort of been an
obsession of Trump's. Even from the time
he started running for president in
2015, this was something that he would
talk about on the campaign trail a lot.
He almost sounded a little bit like
Bernie Sanders on this issue. He was
always complaining that Americans pay
the highest prices for drugs in the
world, which is true. On average, we pay
about three times as much as what other
rich countries pay for prescription
drugs. And in his first term, he tried
to take some actions to do something
about it, but they didn't really work
out. If you just remind us, Margo, why
do Americans pay more than other
countries for drugs?
So, the answer is a little bit
complicated, but I think the simplest
way to answer it is that most other
countries, the government of that
country negotiates directly with
pharmaceutical companies, and they say,
"If you want to sell your drug to all of
the patients in my country, you need to
give us a good
We don't have a system like that in the
United States. The government in general
is not involved in setting the price for
drugs. Instead, we have lots of
different insurance companies that are
making separate deals for different
groups of customers. The other
difference is that in a lot of other
countries, if a drug maker has a new
drug that's really great, but really
expensive, those countries are willing
to say, "If you don't bring the price
down enough, we are willing to walk away
from the negotiating table." Whereas in
the United States, I think we have a
culture and a politics and an
expectation that if a new drug works,
that we want to be able to offer it to
patients here. And so that means that
the government, to the degree it's
involved, and all of those individual
insurance companies, just have a little
bit less leverage to pull the price
down. Because they can't walk away from
the table, the drug companies have a lot
more power here to set whatever price
they want for those drugs. Which, if you
think about it, means that we, as the
United States, are in some ways
underwriting the cost of drugs for other
countries, right? Because our country is
willing to pay kind of whatever. That
probably makes it easier for drug
companies to go to France or the United
Kingdom or wherever else and say, "Sure,
fine. We'll take whatever you're
demanding we take for this drug." I
think that's absolutely true. The United
States market is incredibly important to
the pharmaceutical industry. We pay
these super high prices. Also, we're
just a really big country. And so a lot
of the business model is sort of
predicated on the idea that the drug
company is going to make almost all of
its money on a new drug in the United
States market. And then anything that
they get from these other countries is
kind of gravy. Right. So, okay. So, you
said Trump couldn't bring down the drug
prices in his first term. Now he's
obviously back in office. What has
changed? So, one thing that hasn't
changed is he's continued to think that
this is a really important issue. But
here are a few things that are
different.
>> [music]
>> One is that the market for drugs has
changed a little bit. The explosion of
these GLP-1 drugs that treat obesity has
led to many more consumers buying drugs
directly and going around their health
insurance. So, that's kind of a new
consumer market for drugs that didn't
exist before. Mhm. And the other thing
is the political pressures around health
care affordability that Trump is facing,
that Americans feel like health care is
too expensive.
>> Mhm. For example, he had this big
campaign promise that he was going to be
the father of IVF and he was going to
help [music] a lot of couples that were
having trouble with fertility make IVF
more affordable. Mhm. And then on top of
that, the Congress, [music] as part of
its big tax bill, made major cuts to
state Medicaid programs that provide
insurance to lots of low-income people.
And at the end of last year, Congress
allowed subsidies to expire that helped
millions of Americans buy Obamacare
health insurance plans. And so, that's
increasing the premiums for people who
buy that kind of insurance and
increasing the number of people who
don't have coverage. Mhm. I think all of
this is creating pressure for him to try
to start to find solutions around
[music] rising health care costs.
And here's the thing about prescription
drugs. They are not the largest cause of
health care spending. Most of our health
care spending goes to pay for
hospitalization and doctors visits. But,
I think that drug costs are particularly
salient for a lot of people because it's
the one health care cost that people
kind of deal with every month. And so,
Trump decides that he wants to focus on
the pharmaceutical companies and their
role in the system. And he begins a
pressure campaign on these companies
directly. What does that mean? Like,
what does he actually start doing? So,
he has his trade officials do an
investigation and determine that they
can impose major tariffs on
pharmaceutical products. And then he
goes to the CEOs of individual
pharmaceutical companies. And he
basically said to them like, "Look, I
could put a big tariff on you. I can
make it really hard for you to continue
to do business in this country. I really
need you to make me a deal." So, he
starts negotiating with all these drug
companies one at a time, and he begins
hauling them out in public in front of
the cameras to announce deals. I think
this is one of the biggest medical
announcements that
>> [snorts]
>> this office has ever made because we're
talking about So, he starts with a drug
company Pfizer. Pfizer has agreed to
provide some of their most popular
current medications to all consumers at
heavily discounted prices of And he has
this press conference with the CEO of
that company. Mr. President, what
>> [laughter]
>> What an honor that we here And the press
conference, like it has a little bit of
like a hostage video kind of feel to it.
>> He has a beautiful office,
but the Oval is the greatest, [laughter]
right? What do you think? I think by
far. You see the CEO of Pfizer get up in
front of the camera and talk about how
delighted he is to offer these big
discounts on his products. Now we have
clarity about what is the framework
for the US pricing. Which, of course,
they never would have wanted to do
before. And going forward, this is how
things will be priced in the US and
abroad. And it's at that press
conference that Trump mentioned the idea
of this Trump RX website. Drugs will be
available for direct purchase online at
a website operated by the federal
government where all of these deals are
going to be pulled together and made
public for the American people to find.
>> [music]
>> And then, over the next weeks and
months,
one by one,
they have executives from numerous drug
companies Mr. President, thank you.
Thank you, Mr. President.
>> It's a true honor to be here. come out
for these press conferences. We're going
to be significantly lowering the cost of
the medicines they rely on. Announce
these deals and say that they're going
to be offering much better pricing to
American consumers.
>> And that's a 70% price reduction, and
that also will be available on Trump Rx.
We're also very
>> And at each one of these press
conferences
>> Now you're going to see numbers that
nobody would believe possible. Think of
this.
>> Trump is using this incredibly
hyperbolic language to describe the
kinds of deals that are being offered.
>> 500, 600, 700, 800%.
Saying, you know, these are not
discounts of 50 or 80%, but they are
700, 800, 1,000% discounts.
>> You're talking about 1,400, 1,500,
1,600% reductions in some cases.
Discounts that are mathematically not
possible. And I think based on that, I
won't even take questions today because
there's no way I can take questions that
are anywhere comparable to what you just
witnessed. You just witnessed
the drug prices
that will go down at levels never
thought
>> [music]
>> even possible, Marty. Thank So, by the
time this website rolled out last week,
there's been this drumbeat of press
conference after press conference, and I
think it's led to this expectation that
it's going to be this huge deal, and
there are going to be all of these
wonderful discounts on drugs.
>> [music]
>> But, if you look at the details of these
actual deals
the reality is very different [music]
than that.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
So, Margo, you said before the break
that the way that Trump had been talking
about this website had set up huge
expectations that weren't necessarily
met when you actually looked at the
deals represented on this site. So, tell
us a little bit more about what you
found when you looked into this more.
So, when you look at this website, it is
absolutely not revolutionizing the price
of most drugs that most Americans take.
First of all, there are only 43 drugs on
this website. There are thousands and
thousands of prescription drugs. So,
this is this tiny, tiny little fraction
of the drugs that people need. Right,
that is not a lot of the drug market.
Yeah, and for people who have insurance,
which is 85% of all Americans, this
website is really not offering them a
better price than what they already
have. But, there are two categories of
drugs where the deals are actually
pretty good. Those are drugs for
infertility and for obesity. I think we
should take a look at this website
together and just kind of like walk
through what you might actually see.
Yeah, let's do it.
>> [music]
>> So, I'm going to go to trumprx.gov,
right? That's the website?
>> [music]
>> I'm going there, too.
All right, so the first thing that I see
is in big letters it says, "Find the
world's lowest prices on prescription
drugs." And there's like a little pill
instead of a period after the word
drugs. There's a vial kind of hovering
over the word prices. And let's see, you
can scroll down, we see comparisons
between the USA and Canada. Okay, so
keep going though, cuz this is my
favorite part. There's a spinning globe
with the United States in gold. It's
very catching. And it says,
"Thanks to President Trump, the days of
Big Pharma price gouging are over.
Leveraging the full weight and power of
the United States of America, the
president has ensured every American
gets the lowest prices on prescription
medications in the developed world."
You know, I think it's a very beautiful
website. The design is very clean. It's
enjoyable. It's easy to understand.
But, it is continuing to make these very
hyperbolic promises that it really just
doesn't deliver on.
>> [music]
>> Okay, so let's look at the actual drugs.
I'm going to scroll down until I find a
drug. Okay, so the first drug listed
here is Wegovy, a weight loss
medication, right? Margo, tell me what
we are looking at. So, Wegovy, this is
one of these GLP-1 drugs. This is a drug
that is used to treat obesity. And it
says Wegovy pen 74 to 85% off. And then
there's this little chart that shows
you, depending on what dose of the drug
you're going to buy, what is the price.
So, the list price for this drug is more
than a thousand dollars a month. On this
website, it says original price
$1,349.02.
That is what you would have to pay at
the pharmacy, 1350 a month. And with the
Trump RX pricing, what they are showing
you is for the highest dose of the drug,
the price is only $349.
So, this is some really significant
savings for people who take this drug,
don't have insurance coverage for it,
and are paying with their own money out
of pocket. I want to look at some of the
other drugs on this website because I
noticed that a lot of the drugs listed
of these 43 are fertility drugs, which
are drugs that people often have to pay
for out of pocket. And I'd actually
asked a girlfriend of mine who recently
went through IVF to send me the list of
drugs she had to purchase out of pocket
from an online pharmacy recently because
I wanted to compare the prices that she
paid to the prices being advertised on
Trump RX. My friend paid about $300 for
it, and if we just type it into Trump
RX, we can see that it starts at the
same dosage that she had for $168.
So, that's a significant discount. Yeah,
I think your friend's price is kind of
illustrative, right? The Trump RX
website is saying that the original
price was $966.
Your friend was paying around $300. So,
this is a big savings. $168 is less than
$300. I think for these fertility drugs,
it's another example where the Trump
administration did negotiate better
discounts than were available before.
And I do think that the reduced cost of
some of these infertility drugs is going
to make these treatments more affordable
for women who need them, but it is not
quite as big as what the website is
promising. Mhm. So, if you think about
obesity drugs and infertility drugs,
these two examples are the places where
Trump Rx is actually doing the most
work. Okay, weight loss drugs, IVF
drugs, got it. But,
what about literally everything else?
So, the literally everything else is a
little bit more disappointing. And
here's why.
>> [music]
>> These other drugs are the kinds of drugs
that treat more common conditions like
asthma, high cholesterol, diabetes.
These are the kinds of drugs that almost
everyone's insurance covers [music]
really well. And so, if you have
insurance, then you're not paying the
full price. You're paying a copayment,
which in many cases could be like $25 a
month. That's pretty much going to beat
the Trump Rx price for all of these
drugs. And 85% [music] of Americans have
insurance coverage that covers their
drugs. So, that really is most people.
Mhm.
>> [music]
>> Then, even if you're thinking about the
people who don't have insurance and who
have to pay for their drugs directly
with cash, my colleague Rebecca Robbins
and I went through this list of drugs.
And of the 43 drugs, we found that about
half of them already have generics that
are on the market that are cheaper than
the prices that are being offered on
Trump Rx.
So, even for those people who don't have
insurance, they would not be better off
buying the drugs through this system.
They would be better off going to their
pharmacy [music] and just paying for a
generic.
Is it going to be clear to people that
this website might not give them the
best deal for the drug that they're
looking for?
The website has some disclaimers on it.
When you go on each individual page, you
will see that there is a disclaimer, for
example, that you should check and see
if you have insurance, it might be
cheaper with a co-payment. So, this is
not a one-stop shop for people, and even
the people who have designed this Trump
Rx website acknowledge that and are
telling consumers that.
At the same time though, let's just be
honest about the amount of time and
resources people have to investigate
their own healthcare. Like, if you are
working full-time, if you are a
caregiver, if you are working multiple
jobs, the amount of time that you're
likely to invest in whether you can get
the cheapest drug by like looking this
up, looking at your insurance, etc.,
etc., is probably kind of limited. So,
if you have the general impression from
the press conferences we talked about or
others, that this is going to be the
cheapest version of the way that you get
your drugs, you might just end up using
Trump Rx, right? Even if it's not
actually the best deal.
You might, but I think that most
Americans actually are used to using
their insurance for drugs. They're not
used to paying directly with cash and
shopping around for the best price in
the way that this website is encouraging
them to do. But, some people that we
talked to said that they're worried
people are going to think that Trump Rx
is offering them the best deal, and they
are not going to look into these other
options, and they're going to end up
overpaying for drugs. So, the bottom
line here, it seems from everything
you've said, is that if you have trouble
paying for your prescription drugs in
the United States, this website is
probably not going to fix that problem.
Yeah, this website just isn't really
doing very much for most Americans who
struggle with their prescription drug
prices. For example, some of the most
expensive drugs on the market right now,
and the ones that Americans and
insurance companies struggle to pay for,
are drugs for cancer. There are not any
drugs for cancer on this website.
>> Mhm. And it's worth noting that this is
just the beginning. More drugs are
expected to be added to this website
over time, but for right now, it's very
clear that this is not the solution to
the problem of high prescription drug
costs in America.
So, Margo, if this website is really
only going to help people who either
want to lose weight or have more
children,
it does make me wonder about the
decision to focus on those two groups to
begin with, especially because candidate
Trump made growing the American family
such a big part of his campaign.
Do you think that this Trump RX program
is motivated more by ideology and
perhaps campaign promises than by a
desire to truly improve affordability?
I don't really think it is. I think it's
more of a happy accident that these are
drugs that Trump would love to take
credit for lowering the price of because
they connect to his campaign promises in
the case of infertility and they're
really popular in the case of weight
loss drugs, but they're also drugs where
the drug company already had a pretty
big incentive to offer a discount, that
there is this big market of people who
are already paying for it with their own
money, and the publicity of the Trump RX
launch might help bring them more
customers that will compensate for the
lower prices. But, the whole exercise, I
think, very much fits into the kind of
salesmanship that we expect from Trump.
He does not really have a solution to
the broader question of healthcare
affordability. He does not have a
comprehensive plan to lower healthcare
costs at the hospital or at doctors or
any of the other places where most
Americans are faced with the biggest
bills.
And even more than that, his
administration has taken actions that
are raising the cost of healthcare for a
lot of Americans that could cause
millions of Americans to lose their
health insurance.
So, this is not just a small solution,
but it is a small solution to a problem
that is getting worse on Trump's watch.
>> [music]
>> Margo Singer-Cats, thank you again for
being with us today. It's nice to be
here.
>> [music]
[music]
>> We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
>> [music]
>> During a congressional hearing on
Tuesday, Todd Lyons, the acting ICE
director, refused to say whether anyone
had been fired after an ICE agent shot
and killed Renee Good in Minnesota last
month. Can you tell us if at least, God,
I hope at least one person has been
fired for their conduct since these
operations have begun? Are you Are you
telling us you can't even say one
person's been fired? [music]
Sir, I'm not going to talk about
personnel actions, but we will get back
to you.
The Trump administration had labeled
Good a domestic terrorist in the
immediate aftermath of her [music]
death.
When pressed, Lyons refused to apologize
for the label and declined to answer
whether it was true.
And a shooter killed nine people [music]
and injured 25 others in a remote town
in northeastern British Columbia,
>> [music]
>> the third deadliest shooting in Canada's
history.
Seven people were found dead in Tumbler
Ridge Secondary School,
>> [music]
>> including a person believed to be the
shooter, who died from what appeared to
be a self-inflicted injury.
Two other people were found dead in a
local residence, while another person
died while [music] being transported to
a hospital.
A motive for the attack was not
immediately clear. Authorities [music]
have released details about the shooter.
Today's episode [music] was produced by
Alex Stern, Rob Zipko, Anna Foley, and
Diana Wynn. It was edited by Lexi Dio
and M.J. Davis Lynn. Contains music by
Marion Lozano and Diane Wong and was
engineered by Chris Wood.
>> [music]
>> That's it for the daily. [music] I'm
Rachel Abrams. See you tomorrow.